=head1 NAME

Data::MATFile - read MATLAB MAT-File data

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    use Data::MATFile qw/read_matfile/;

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This module provides functions to access the MAT-File format used by
MATLAB and Octave.

=head1 FUNCTIONS

=head2 read_matfile

    my $matfile = read_matfile ('something.mat');

=head3 Keys and values of returned hash

=over

=item descriptive_text

C<< $matfile->{descriptive_text} >> contains the "descriptive text" of
the MAT-File. This is the information stored in the first 116 bytes of
the file.

=item subsys_data_offset

C<< $matfile->{subsys_data_offset} >> contains the subsystem data
offset of the file, if it exists. This data is completely ignored by
this module.

=item endian

C<< $matfile->{endian} >> is set to 0 if the file has the same endian-ness
as the local system, or 1 if the file has the opposite endian-ness.

=item data

C<< $matfile->{data} >> contains the data elements of the MAT-File. It
is a hash reference keyed by the names of the data elements. The
structure of each element is described in L</Structure of a data
element> below.

=back    

=head3 Structure of a data element

The hash reference which represents each data element of the MAT-File
contains the following fields.

=over

=item name

The name of the matrix. This may be undefined, for example for the
elements of a structure.

=item array

The array data itself. For the case of numeric data, this is stored as
a multidimensional matrix. For the case of structure data, this is
stored as a hash reference, with the hash keys being the field names,
and the corresponding hash values being the fields.

=item class

The class of the array, as a MATLAB constant. This can be converted
into a string using L</mx2word>.

=item dimensions

The dimensions of the array, as an array reference. This will always
be of dimension at least two. For example, a two-dimensional matrix
with a single cell will have dimensions

    $item->{dimensions} = [1, 1]

=back

=head2 mx2word

    my $class_name = mx2word ($class);

Convert a numeric MATLAB class identifier C<$class> into its string
equivalent. For example, "1" becomes "mxCELL_CLASS".

=head2 mi2word

    my $type_name = mi2word ($type);

Convert a numeric MATLAB type identifier C<$type> into its string
equivalent. For example, "1" becomes "miINT8".

=head1 BUGS

This section documents the known deficiencies of the module relative
to a perfect MAT-File reader.

=over

=item No incremental parsing

There is no incremental parsing of the MAT-File, all parsing is done
in one shot.

=item No subsystem data handling

This module does not handle the subsystem data offset. The value is
preserved as the field L</subsys_data_offset>, but not used in any
way.

=item No endian-ness reversing yet

This module does not support reverse-endian file format.

=item No writing

This module does not support writing MAT-Files.

=item Numeric only

This module only supports numeric matrices.

=item No complex

This module does not support complex matrices.

=item Version 5 only

This module only supports the "version 5" MAT-File format described
under L</REFERENCES>.

=item Only matrices at top level

This module only reads matrices at the top level. It's not clear from
the reference whether things other than matrices can occur at the top
level, but if one does occur, this module prints a warning message and
discards the data.

=back

These problems partly exist because the creator of the module does not
have examples of MAT-Files with these characteristics. Those wishing
to see development of support for the above should contact the creator
of the module and supply him with an example file demonstrating the
correct binary format.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<mat2json> - This script, provided with the distribution, converts a
MAT-File into JSON format.

=head1 REFERENCES

The MATLAB MAT-File Format is described in
L<http://www.mathworks.com/help/pdf_doc/matlab/matfile_format.pdf>.

Octave is documented at
L<http://www.gnu.org/software/octave/doc/interpreter/index.html>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Ben Bullock, <bkb@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT & LICENCE

This package and associated files are copyright (C) 2012 Ben Bullock.

You can use, copy, modify and redistribute this package and associated
files under the Perl Artistic Licence or the GNU General Public
Licence.



